Module 4
========

Kozol - Fire in the Ashes
-------------------------

### Chapter 6: Survivors / Chapter 7: The Boy Who Ate a Giant Bag of Cookies While He Walked Me All Around the Neighborhood, and His Very Interesting Mom

What are the "survivors" of poverty? Those who:
-	Fall into trouble at an early age, but over time "turn their backs upon that life and the dangers that it held"
-	Receive "a sense of calling" to service or a job
-	"Perceive themselves as virtually unbounded in their academic goals and were looking to a future that encompassed colleges or universities"

***1993***. Leonardo, age 6, lives in the South Bronx with his mother and has chronic asthema. They live near an incinerator for medical waste, which "spewed its toxins to a wider population of approximately 40,000 people, virtually all them black or Hispanic families" (p. 149). In 1995, hospitalizations for asthema were 14x higher than East Side of Manhattan. Eventually, in 1997, the incenerator is shut down and, a year later, the owner agrees to donate money for kids to attend an "asthma camp". "Once the incinerator ceased its operations, hospitalizations for asthma in the Mott Haven area rapidly declined." (p. 158). Leonardo's also disappeared.

> But, for Leonardo, pulling out his asthma pump to take a puff or two or three when he began to wheeze, it had come to be a fairly normal part of his existence and, to all appearances, he did not let it slow him down or undermine the pleasure that he took in making observations that he may not always have intended to be quite as funny or alarming as they were.
> p. 151

His mother, Antsy, is a "largely self-taught intellectual". She is committed to Leonardo's education, including teaching him to read at age 4 and sending him to a neighborhood preschool. He had a 5th grade teach Miss Harrinarine ("strict but good natured") who ran a small satellite school that went into middle school, which Leonardo attended. Antsy was very involved, "She questioned teachers. She went into the classrooms." The principal of the school said "She's always in my hair" but Miss Harrinarine said she was "the kind of parent every teacher hopes for. I wish that we had more of them..." (p. 155). Antsy planned parties for her neighborhood (held at a former trap house, she even had some gang members help clean) and frequently had children over at her apartment.

Leonardo is recruited by a New England boarding school for high school. He had no problem adjusting to the academic pace, and was the captain of the football team. He went on to college and, despite struggling his first semester, graduate with a degree in sociology. During college, he worked to pay tuition and received support from his mother (sending him money and home cooked meals). His first job out of school is a managerial position at a produce market. On the side, he was writing and performing stand-up comedy acts.

While Leonardo is in college, Antsy works at a home for the mentally imparied. She is injured after breaking up a fight between staff and a patient, and is forced to quit. She fell into depression, but after surgery for her injury and antidepressants, "my spirits were restored and I didn't need the medication anymore."

> In Antsy's case, except for the time when her spinal injury forced her to stay home, she had always compensated for the inward pull -- the withdrawl from activity that's familiar to depression -- by throwing herself outward into the thick and thin of life, into the streets, into the schools, into the battle for clean air, into the battle to clean out a drug-infested block so she could have a party for her baseball team.
> p. 165

Leonardo tells Kozol of a friend from the Bronx who got into trouble early in life. Leonardo had him over during his time in college for two weeks. The friend attended his sociology classes and got involved.

> He saw people of his age going to their classes with their backpacks. He was amazed, after clas, to see them, with their books and laptops, lying on the grass. 'Wow!' he said. 'You got trees! You got grass!' It wasn't life he'd never seen a tree before -- it was the whole setting. Students playing Frisbee. Other students studying. Open spaces. Lots of grass! There was a pond. People looked relaxed. The main thing is, he saw people going somewhere with their lives. And he liked what he was seeing. I think that something changed in him. He didn't get in trouble for a long time after that...
> p. 167

Inside Amy's Brain
------------------

"According to research, adolescent learners need 9 hours and 15 minutes of sleep each night." Amy is a high school(?) student who, apparently because of 9pm play practice, is sleep deprived. She does not eat a proper breakfast before (barely) catching the bus. She goes to chemistry class and falls asleep.

> Mr. Porter doesn't notice that his lecture in ineffective. Although he realizes that his early-morning class is quiet, he likes the fact that these students don't cause any discipline problems. It's a nice way to start his day. Someone needs to explain to Mr. Porter that his first-period students need some stimulation to wake them up.
> p. 2

She then goes to English, where they are discuissing Romeo and Juliet and its relation to West Side Story. Amy likes this, because "adolescent students respond to emotion and novelty." They then note the different parts of the brain and how they relate to her day:

- **Frontal lobe**: contributes to judgement, organization, planning "that constrain our emotional impulses". This is the last to mature, "Adults must act as the frontal lobe for these students" as her English teacher does when "he allows them to engage emotionally with the content he teaches, but within the parameters he has established"
- **Parietal lobe**: affects movement and spatial awareness -- is developed in PhysEd
- **Cerebellum**: coordinates movement, and perhaps cognitive thought with development through physical exercise
- **Temporal lobe**: communication. Amy finds it easier to memorize Spanish and speak it in class now that it is her second year.. Differences in development among students means teachers need to "clarify students' questions and concerns to ensure that all students understand expectations."

At lunch, Amy notices the different cliques sitting together in the lunchroom. Also noted is the separation of male/female -- "oputting students in mixed-sex and mixed social groups for academic networking and projects may help them find common ground."

Amy has only eaten carbs today (she had chips/soda for lunch) -- her brain releases **serotonin** which makes her tired. She sleeps through 5th period study hall, and as a result doesn't finish her history homework for next period. She feels emotional about this, but when given an opportunity to finish it later, she gets wrapped up in a social conversation instead (a sign her frontal lobe has not fully developed).

> Today [Mrs. Meyers, the math teacher] knows how to engage her students and keep them focused. Today she uses problem-based learning. She tells her students to work in small groups and figure out what their annual income must be to afford the car of their dreams. Mrs. Meyers appeals to the adolescents with a novel assignment, allows them to work together, and gives them choices. The class quickly gets to work.
> p. 5

She goes home for a quick bite then returns to school for play practice. She finds her lines very easy to memorize -- this is because the movement in the play helps trigger memory.

Ecology of Mass Media (PowerPoint)
----------------------------------

Media is a (bidirectional) socializing agent. Estimated: children spend 3-5 hours in front of television. Media can **desensitize** -- certain things can become less shocking/problematic if they are viewed over and over.

### Mister Rogers defending PBS to US Senate

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXEuEUQIP3Q

Under LBJ, the Corporation for Public Broadcasting was created with a grant of $20mil. Nixon wanted to half this amount. Fred Rogers testifies to the US senate. He says (in 1969) his budget is $6000 per episode, which would produce 2 minutes of animated cartoons ("bombardment", he calls it). "We don't have to bop someone on the head to make drama on the screen, we get these feelings by getting a haircut, with our brothers and sisters, in simple family situations" (2:40). "I give an expression of care to each child every day, to help him realize that he is unique" (3:30).

### Mister Rogers TV Hall of Fame

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q3vp-EXQ5Rs

Starts with a clips when Mr. Rogers has a kid in a wheelchair -- sings "It's you I like" to him. "We have to all find ways to discover our own ways don't we? Of doing things when we're feeling blue." (4:50). The kid surprises him 18 years fucking later at the award ceremony oh christ! Wow that's hammy -- excellent job. "Will you support me as I say my few words." "I believe those of us in television are chosen to be servents... chosen to help meet the deeper needs of those who watch and listen" (8:15). "How do we make goodness attractive? By doing whatever we can to bring courage to those whose lives move near our own. By treating our neighbor at least as well as we treat ourselves. And allowing that to inform everything we produce" (9:15).
