Module 3
========

Kozol - Fire in the Ashes
-------------------------

### Chapter 3: Pietro and His Children

Pietro Locatello. Wife murdered, three children, mother ("Grandma") comes in to help. Pietro, "too shaken to continue", loses doorman/maintance worker job, leads to entering homeless system, ends up at Martinique Hotel.

**1985**. Three children: Christopher (10), Ellie (5), Miranda (4). Christopher "regarded me distrustfully", panhandled.

> Pietro: "At his age, I simply cannot keep him in a cage within this room. It feels like a prison to him. All his friends are out there in the streets. He wants to be there with them."
> p. 53

A man via charity work buys Christopher presents and invites him for one weekend to Long Island.

> "I noticed that he spoke to [Pietro] in tones of thinly veiled contempt, as if he felt that, by Pietro's inability to give him things that other people could afford to buy him, he had lost the right to exercise authority and no longer held the status of a father in his eyes."
> p. 54

**1990**. Family resettled to the Bronx, "only sightly less impoverished and drug-ridden than the area around St. Ann's. Pietro works at grocery store (gets paid under the table to stay on food stamps/welfare). They keep pet kittens and a pet duck. Welfare worker demands they get rid of the duck, despite only costing "three dollars" for two months food. 

> Pietro: "I guess she's thinking, 'This is something they can do without.' And that's correct. But my children have to do without so much. Having animals to play with is a little thing, I guess. It's a little 'extra.' I guess they figure it's too much. It's hard to know the answer: What's too much? What's enough? Kids need clothing. They need food. They need a roof above their heads. Do they also need to have a pet?"
> p. 58

Christopher (almost 15) has "pretty much dropped out of school". Pietro has "no power to control him" and "Grandma, he said, was the one that Christopher confided in". Kozol suggests Grandma "made up lies in his defense".

He is "several years below the level of an average student" because of his years of homelessness. Why did he not get the public education? Kozol cites "bureaucratic chaos or the failure of the schools to communicate with parents" (p.59).

> "It would have required an inordinate degree of compassionate attention, not only in the schools but in a broad array of public institutions, to have had the slightest chance of turning back this very angry adolescent from the way that he was heading."
> p. 60

**1995**. The girls are at Catholic school paid for by Kozol's foundation. Pietro & Grandma make sure they have clean clothes, were not allowed out late, one girl reports, "People in the neighborhood treated us as if they knew we were protected, that we were a close family." Christopher has been in/out of Rikers, having pushed a stranger onto subway tracks. Kozol (reluctantly, at request of father) sends letters of support to courts, but eventually stops replying to Christopher after not being convinced he has changed.

**1998**. Pietro lost his Section 8 (thanks to "arbitrary and erratic" "bureaucratic workings"), causing Miranda + her sister to be "out there on their own". Miranda drops out of school her senior year to find a job. After lots of part-time work, she finds longer term employement in home care for the elderly. Becomes pregnant at 20, as a result is put on rent assistance and food stamps.

**2005+**. Christopher is out of prision and (since she was the only one who "had a home that he could come to") stays with Miranda. Eventually he gets a job at Equinox (lol), but he doesn't help Miranda with rent or food, spends money on himself.

> "At last I told him he would have to leave." She spoke about this with a sense of sorrow at her inability to keep him there and, as I suspect she may have wistfully believed, to function as a counterforce, by her availability and physical proximity, against his seemingly compulsive inclination to do almost anything that would get him into trouble once again.
> p. 68

Grandma begins showing signs of Alzheimer's and is put in a nursing home. At some point, she signed over the legal right to oversee her finances to Christopher. She had been receiving a widow's pension, which had accumulated to a fair amount unbeknownst to her. Pietro wants to divide the money equally among his children.

> "When I told him I would not permit this, he was very rude to me. I told him, 'I'm your father. You're my son. I want you to obey me.'"  But Christopher, he said, had suddenly grown cold again. "My son has turned away from me".

> "When Daddy said it wasn't right for him to take the money, my brother really slammed him -- 'I'm the one in charge of things.' He could be a monster"
> p. 71

Pietro's health starts to deteriorate due to his physically demanding part-time work. He has a stroke and dies shortly after, Grandma dies a few months later.

> In comparison to Vicky's story (ch. 2): The survival and the stamina of the younger sister and the growing hardness and the loss of stable bearings in the older brother are what I had in mind in saying, as I did, that I did not look for "patterns" but could not escape the sense that there were parallels.

> [Christopher and Eric] received their first induction into cynical behavior, distancing, dishonesty, and patterns of evasiveness in the homeless shelters and in the years that followed when they were resettled in impoverished neighborhoods that had the fewest services of social intervention on the part of public institutions.
> p. 74-75

**2009**. Christopher, despite being connected to a charitable agency for former inmates which helped him get a part-time job and apartment, dies (possibly intentionally) of a heroin overdose. This links the story to Eric, who killed himself by gunshot.

> Miranda: "He got the bad part of the deal when we were young. For me and Ellie, even back when we were in the Martinique, we never felt we had to be so hard and cold because we had our Grandma and our Daddy to take care of us. We would never have to go into the streets. Besides, we thought, 'Our brother does it *for* us.' Like he'd bring us presents now and then -- little things, nothing real expensive, but he didn't need to do it, so that *did* mean something to us. He was our big brother. It was like, 'He'll be looking out for us...'"
> p. 78

### Chapter 4: Silvio: Invincible

Kozol describes NYC's homeless agency carrying out deterrence strategies to discourage the homeless from seeking their services. Ex, Emergency Assistance Units (EAUs) which held homeless waiting for the city to find them shelter. Undivided space with other homeless families. Sometimes held there for weeks (to "test" them to see if they truly need the service).

Ariella Patterson, mother of two boys (6, 9), goes through this and ends up at the Martinique Hotel. Finished high school and had some college credits. After going through a lot of bureaucracy, gets an apartment in the same neighborhood as Vicky (ch. 2). Known as the "Diego-Beekman complex", subsidized by federal funds but privately owned. "The buildings were routinely cited for serious infractions of the law." Including lack of security, which led to active and open drug trade.

> Ariella: "Some kept their spirits up, decorated their apartments nicely, gave their kids a good sense of security, and protected them from getting into risky situations. I think it was much harder for the families that had come out of the shelters. You just can't put that many people who are shaky and unstable, and children who are loaded with a lot of pent-up anger, into a single neighborhood without it having some effect on almost everyone."
> p. 86-87

**1993**. Ariella holds multiple retail sales jobs. Makes $16k, double the average in the Mott Haven neighborhood. Took children to museums, restaurants. "I wanted them to understand that life as they were seeing it around them in the neighborhood did not necessairly have to define them." (p. 90). However, unable to "counteract the tide of violence and drug-related wildness" that he grew up in, son Silvio (12) starts stealing, drug use. Eventually Ariella files for a PINS ("person in need of supervision"), sends him to a group home. Silvio begs to come home, Ariella complies, but he continues getting into danger (ends up with a knife slash across his face). He is killed at 14 years old (1989) "surfing" on the roof of a train with friends.

> All the early efforts she had made, the visits to the museums and concert halls and restaurants and other nice and interesting places in Manhattan -- all those efforts to expose him to the normal things that children in the safer and less troubled sections of New York might ordinarily enjoy -- was there ever any chance at all that this would make the silghtest difference for a boy who'd seen what he'd already seen and whose chosen avatar of the triumphant and exciting life had been a movie character, who came to his own demise, as it happened, in a hail of bullets, by the name of "Scarface"?
> p. 94-95

Ariella describes being surrounded by groups of dealers. The leader of one, "in the eyes of teenage boys... he was a celebrity" and "because the stuff he sold was good, people who were desperate for drugs knew they could depend on him." (p. 97). Ariella tries to keep other son Armando out of it, especially when children were used to carry drugs for dealers. Armando has good attendence, but goes to a poor school and is diagnosed with a learning disibility, yet "the school did not provide him with the specialized instruction required under state and federal legislation for a student who had been identified as having special needs." (p. 98).

> Ariella: "So even though he failied his courses they would pass him pon from grade to grade. He wasn't learning, but they kept promoting him and sent him on to middle school."
> p. 98

Armando drops out before finishing 9th grade and starts dealing. He is arrested for weapon posession and later posession of heroin/cocaine. Does 4 years in prison, ends up becoming addicted to heroin in prison. Ends up going in and out of Riker's Island, gets married and his two children during this time. Has since stayed out of prison, but still "as a former convict and with the limitations of his education, he has found it difficult to obtain the kids of jobs that can support his family" (p. 102).

Ariella has two younger boys as well, who would have been young enough to escape any strong conscious influence from the Martinique Hotel. She agressively makes sure Stephen, the older of the two, is placed in better elementary/middle schools. Stephen was able to get through bouts of depression thanks to a psychiatric center at Mount Sinai Hospital ("believed by people in her neighborhood to be a place that served primarily the white and middle class, which may perhaps have been an accurate impression"). Graduates high school on time and is planning on returning back to college.

### Chapter 5: Alice Washington: The Details of Life

Alice meets Kozol at the Martinique Hotel. Has cancer (smoking), later learns she has HIV. Has three children. Also ended up in a EAU (ch. 4), had experiences of being bounced around and rejected at potential living spaces. Took an interest in politics, "When she came upon a story in one of the papers that offended her intelligence, she would cut it out and write her often pungent comments in the margins."

> It was she who pointed out to me, for instance, that the papers were referring to the presence of so many homeless people in this section of Manhattan as essentially a sanitation problem. Plumbing imagery was being used in speaking of "a back-up" in the homeless population, which had caused "the overflow" to spill into the old hotels around Times Square.
> p. 110

Bounced around through the bureaucracy to have the city find her an apartment, eventually moving to a building near where Pietro (ch. 3) lived.

> She had started smoking "a lot more than I should," she said, while she was in the Martinique. "Three packs a day" -- far more than she'd ever smoked before. "It was the goddamn tension there. You could cut it with a knife."
> p. 117

Tells the story of a cop off the record suggesting she buy a gun after she is mugged once. "Still, it frightened me. I thought, 'Hello?! This man ain't no criminal. He's a cop here at my precinct and he's telling me I ought to get a gun!'" (p. 119).

> Alice: "Whenever they say, 'Women in New York are wearing such and such these days,' I always wonder who they mean, because I know for certain that they don't mean anyone like me. They do it in this ignorant and excited way as if they didn't know that there are people in New York who have to wear the clothes they bought ten years ago."
> p. 121

Kozol then talks about Alice's HIV status, noting that HIV had "swept across the South Bronx in the preceding years, ravaging entire families". Alice seemed not to want to discuss her illness too much, "It was 'there' -- a fact that would not go away, a test result, a new reminder of a piece of inescapable reality." Eventually is hospitalized for cancer, tells a story about another patient smoking in bed.

> When I asked her how a patient thought that he could get away with smoking in a hospital, she laughed and said, "They do! They do it all the time... the hospital's not staffed the way it's s'posed to be. You know the deal. Weekend's worst. There's hardly anybody here."
> p. 129

As she spends more time in the hospital, she is perscribed more drugs (Percocet, Tylonal + Codene). She starts to smoke marijuana. Yet, "I wanted to make a salad, but they want too much for lettuce. Lettuce is two dollars. Fresh tomatoes are $1.39..." (p. 134). "Bottles of pills, assembled like a military force, occupied almost one quarter of her kitchen counter."

Alice dies, and Kozol notes how her son, nearly an adult when he first met Alice, was doing well leading a "relatively stable" life. He mentions Alice's strength even in the face of her illness, saying "She empathized with those who were true victims but, in her own case, she rejected victimhood."

Ecology of School (PowerPoint)
------------------------------

School is a socializing agent. From "society"'s perspective, the role is to "provide an understanding of what it means to participate in a democratic society". From an "individual"'s perspective, the role is to "acquire the skills and knowledge to become self-sufficient/participate in society". School is universal (open to all), compulsory (legally required to attend), formal (length of day, length of school year), prescriptive (based on customs, morals, values).

Parents have options in schools:
+	Public
+	Private
+	Magnet: special programs, draws students from different neighborhoods by choice, usually critera to join)
+	Vouchers: certificates by the government the amount the district would normally spend on the student to be spent on a child's private education
+	Charter: a school, authorized and funded by the district, formed by people with a shared educational philosophy
+	Home-Based Schools: most credentialed teachers follow a standard curriculum

There are ecological effects on how school functions:
+	***Macroscopic***: Politics and economics directly affect schools. Ethnicity and relgion defines the prescriptive parts of school. The labor need for STEM workers causes a shift in what is taught in schools.
+	***Chronosystem***: Adaptations to societal change, changes in legislation, theory/research, technology, health (substance use, violence, obesity, metal detectors)
+	***Mesosystem***: Individualized educational experiences, school-family involvement and relationship, school-peer group, school-media (edutainment, internet, digital learning enviornments), school-community (school size, business)

Ecology of Teaching (PowerPoint)
-------------------------------- 

Teachers are socializing agents. Just like parenting, teachers have learning styles:

+	***Authoritarian***: strong, direct, perhaps causing hostility, but could be productive
+	***Democratic***: "a leader who guides and collaborates with students, results in content kiddos"
+	***Permissive***: lassiez-faire, bored, disconnected

"According to Vyzgotsky", Zone of Proximal Development: the "space" in development between what a learner can do independentally and what one can do with capable adults.

"When teachers have high expectations, research suggests students will do better"

Students have their own learning style which effects interaction with teacher:
+	***Field Dependence***: "Holistic, concrete, social approach to learning"
+	***Field Independence***: "Analytical, logical, independent of context"

***Macrosystem***: the philosophies of teaching/learning (structure, curriculum, motivation), ex. cooperative vs. competitive, teacher-directed vs. learner-directed. the readiness of the students

The Harlem Children's Zone
--------------------------

### 60 Minutes Video

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Di0-xN6xc_w

"Black kids score lower than white kids" says Anderson Cooper. How do we close the gap? Geoffrey Canada's "labratory" in Harlem: The Harlem Children's Zone. "Back then, there wasn't a way to tell how they were doing. But now..."

America is the land of opportunity, but maybe that's not true? We must "level the playing field" (1:30). "One of the first things kids ask me when they get to know me is Mr. Canada, are you rich? And I say yes I am". "There is a way out, and I will help you." (3:30)

Charter school! School days longer, school year longer, Saturday school, dress code, strict discipline, encouraging healthy eating, onsite medical/dentil clinic. "We guarantee we're going to get them in college" (4:30).

"If my kids don't get to college I will fire the teachers, after school workers, directors... we're not going to blame the kids" (4:50)

(To 5 year old): "Are you going to go to college?" "As much as it kills me, yes" "Why would it kill you?" "Because they have words that I don't know". Now, "I want to be a CEO because it pays the most". Wow!!!

They give kids trips to Disneyworld! They pay high schoolers!!!!!! (6:00)

They pick by lottery. 375 kids applied for 210 spots. (7:00)

Canada has a pipeline scheme, starting from birth and parent education to high school. 90% of those in his after school program go on to college.

Where does the money come from? Wall street! $5k per kid.

OK, so now Harvard came up with some results on the whole thing. Did they close the achievement gap? "The average black 17 year old reads at the level of a white 13 year old." Analyzed 4 years in test scores, gap eliminated. 100% 3rd graders performed at/above math standards. Reduced half in reading. (10:00)

Donations are down, he laid off staff, lost $4mil to Bernie Madoff !!!!!!

Obama was down. "If Geoff can do it in Harlem, why not Detroit? Why not Chicago?"

### Bold New Plan

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Va3K_FGHQgY

At St. Nicholas housing development, $22k median income, surrounded by violence. Some students at the promise academy: "I couldn't focus" "I saw things I shouldn't have."

So they're gonna build a $100mil "school and community center" in the housing development.

"I can see myself being the boss. I can see myself being the boss of things. *ding*!"

### Building a Culture of Success

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9bH99Q89IQQ

Teachers on working there. 
+	This is not a 40 hour work week.
+	We want it to be great
+	Our work is about getting people to overcome obsticles. Not just grad from college, do you have the passion to help people
+	When it's 11 at night and my phone rings because my student has a question about the math test
+	It's interesting it's exciting it's fun, you're using everything you have your imagination your creativity
+	We spend a lot of time in staff development
+	If you're not willing/ready to do whatever it takes, maybe you're not HCZ ready
+	Most of the workers come from the community
+	Maintenance: I know what I've been through, I don't want these kids to go through that. Maybe I can save a few of them.
+	There are many opportunities for the kids, but they choose to be here. It's the culture we create.
+	It feels like home for the staff, kids, myself
+	This could change the course of history for a lot of our little ones
+	I can undo the wrongs of the past
+	I made it out, but I also got a round trip ticket to come back. Doing the work in my community that I love. If you're saving the lives of kids in Harlem then I want to be a part of that.
+	What Mr. Canada does is good for the community. He shows us that we can change, minorities won't always be living in these communities high on crime and violence
