Module 6
========

Lisa Delpit - Other People's Children
-------------------------------------

### Cross-cultural Confusions in Teacher Assessment

"If people read what you're doing entirely differently, then what you're doing will be entirely different" (p. 135). How do we do teacher assessments given the increasingly diverse student and teacher backgrounds? If we assume the current standard (National Teachers' Exam) is culturally discriminatory, and if we therefore assume that the next iteration of assessments is more "sophisticated", then we could run into a situation where "the general public can only conclude that something is wrong with teachers of color -- for, after, all, these assessments were designed to account for cultural differences" (p. 136).

Delpit suggests we shouldn't look to assesment measures in law, business, medicine -- but rather compare teaching to preaching. A black Southern Baptist congregation requires a different style of preaching than an Episcopal one, for example. "Beliefs about what constitutes good teaching vary across different cultural communities" (p. 139). For example, "teaching begins with teachers' awareness of and ability to transfer knowledge" vs. "teaching begins with the establishment of relationships between themselves and their students."

Mainstream teaching discourages teachers from showing emotion, as such display represents "losing control", which goes against the characterization of teachers as "dispassionate arbiters of knowledge and tasks." On the other hand, according to a study about good teaching within African American community:

> Assertive, aggressive, and even angry behavior are all rated as acceptable means of communicating one's intentions as long as these emotions are perceived as genuine... From students' prespective the non-responsive teacher demonstrates not only lack of control, but a non-caring attitude as well.
> p. 141-142

Culture also defines "how the world is talked about as well." In Japan, "students had trouble following the guidelines set by the teacher for giving a good speech because they ran counter to Japanese cultural norms of politeness... Some of the students also mentioned they did not think it was necessary to have an introduction because 'everyone already knows that you are going to say something' and they will listen anyways" (p. 145).

<table>
	<tr>
		<td>Speech Styles in Different Cultures (p. 145-146)</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>African American</td>
		<td>Present information indirectly, through use of metaphor or reference to presume shared experience</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Native Alaskan</td>
		<td>A series of perspectives on the topic, with the expectation that the listener should take on the responsibility of supplying background information, relating subtopics, and making relevant judgements.</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td>Western</td>
		<td>Provide background information, wait for speaker to "make the point"</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Further cultural differences in assessments:
	- Length of pauses during a speaker's turn (causing potential interruptions if the listener thinks the speaker is done)
	- Relationship between teacher and assessor
	- Assessing by watching vs. assessing by talking about what happened
	- Decontextualized lessons (teaching to adults playing the role of kids rather than actual kids)

> After a thorough discussion, the group finally agreed that there was an innate unfairness in judging performances rooted in one set of norms against the very different and unstated set of norms most of the faculty in the room took for granted.
> p. 149

> Instead of asking teachers only to talk about their teaching to assessors to whom they are likely to be particularly indirect... teachers can be observed instead mentoring or supervising student teachers. In such authentic settings, the candidate would likely be more direct and explicit, as prior knowledge would not be assumed in a novice. The teacher's actual competence might be better exhibited. Of course, such an approach would require that some pool of evaluators be equipped to recognize culturally appropriate responses and not conclude that difference implies inadequacy.
> p. 149-150

### The Politics of Teaching Literate Discourse

There exists a conception among "sensitive" teachers that "to demand that these students put aside the language of their homes and communities and adopt a discourse that is not only alien, but that has often been instrumental in furthering their oppression" is racist/classist (relateable!) "Literacy is much more than reading and writing, but rather... part of a larger political entity (discourse)" (p. 153). There are "primary discourses" (the home) and "secondary discourses" (groups one might later encounter). Two ideas help form the racism argument:
	- Discourses cannot be "overtly" taught. This implies a "dangerous kind of determinism" where "you are now locked hopelessly into a lower-class status by your discourse."
	- "[Minorities], when they seek to acquire status discourses, may be faced with adopting values that deny their primary identities." If teacher believe this to be inevitable, then "their sense of justice and fair play might hinder their teaching these discourses." Delpit argues that this can be overcome.

Delpit tells stories of those who, through the instruction of their teachers, managed to acquire a discourse necessary to "succeed" (gain social and economic power).

> The teachers set high standards and then carefully and explicitly instructed students in how to meet them. "You can and will do well," they insisted, as they taught at break times, after school, and on weekends to ensure that their students met their expectations. All of these teachers were able to teach in classrooms the rules for dominant discourses, allowing students to succeed in mainstream America who were not only born outside of the realms of power and status, but who had no access to status institutions.
> p. 158-159

So we know it's possible for students to acquire a discourse, but should they? There are reports of being forced to choose between two groups with no middle ground: i.e. the school world required to "make it" vs. being hip in the African American communicty which "meant to repudiate a school system in which African American consciousness was undervalued or ignored" (p. 160).

> I have met many radical or progressive teachers of literacy who attempt to resolve the problem of students who choose to "not-learn" by essentially deciding to "not-teach." They appear to believe that to remain true to their ideology, their role must be to empower and politicize their most disenfranchised students by refusing to teach what Gee calls the superficial features (grammar, form, style, and so sorth) of dominant discourses. Believing themselves to be contributing to their students' liberation by deemphasizing dominant discourses, they instead seek to develop literacy **solely** within the language and style of the students' home discourse.
> p. 161

Delpit describes three counterpoints to the idea above (p. 162):
	- Members of society need access to dominant discourses to (legally) have access to economic power
	- It is possible to be taught dominant discourses -- there are examples of this
	- "Individuals have the ability to transform dominant discourses for liberatory purposes... using European philosophical and critical standards to challenge the tenets of European belief systems."

So what must be done?
	- "Teachers much acknowledge and validate students' home language without using it to limit students' potential... The point must not be to eliminate students' home languages, but rather to add other voices and discourses to their repertoires." (p. 163)
	- Recognize the conflict between discourses -- that students who appear unable to learn are choosing to "not-learn" to "maintain their sense of identity in the face of what they perceive as a painful choice between allegiance to "them" or "us"" (p. 163-164). Teachers must "saturate the dominant discourse with new meanings". Example: preparing poor Latino students for calculus -- "You have to learn math. They Mayans discovered zero. Math is in your blood!" Afrocentric curricula "seek to illuminate for students (and their teachers) a world in which people with brown and black skin have achieved greatness and have developed a large part of what is considered the great classical tradition." (p. 165)
	- Teacher can "discuss openly the injustices of allowing certain people to succeed, based not upon merit but upon which family they were born into, upon which discourse they had access to as children." Then the teacher's stance can be "Let me show you how to cheat!" (p. 165).

### Education in a Multicultural Society: Our Future's Greatest Challenge

When there is a culture class between the school and its students, "teachers can easily misread students' aptitudes, intent, or abilities as a result of the difference in styles of language use and interactional patterns." (p. 167). "If teachers are to teach effectively, recognition of th eimportance of student perception of teacher intent is critical" (p. 168). For example, the exhibition of personal power: "Sit down, be quiet, and finish your work NOW!" vs. "Would you like to sit down now and finish your paper?"

> This, I believe, is one of the reasons that there recently has been such a movement toward developing schools specifically for African-American males. Black boys **are** unduly penalizied in our regular classrooms. They **are** disproportionately assigned to special education. They do not have to be, and would not be, if our teachers were taught how to redesign classrooms so that the styles of African-American boys are accommodated.
> p. 169

> In many Native American communities there is a prohibition against speaking for someone else... The students appeared unable to write summaries and, even when explicitly told not to, continued to write their opinions of various works rather than summaries of the authors' words... Because they had been taught to always speak for themselves, they found doing so much more comfortable and culturally compatible.
> p. 170

Stereotyping can have a huge effect on teaching: the idea of the "perfect" Asian American student, the "nurturing" African American girl vs. the "academic" white girl, the "nonverbal" Native Alaskan student who requires approrpiate contexts such as small groups. Similarly, assumptions about children can cause the phenomena of "teaching less" despite the effort put in. In a "skills-based" classroom, teaching less can happen by "focusing solely on isolated, decontextualized bits. Such instruction becomes boring and meaningless when not placed in any meaningful context." In "child-centered" classrooms, for example, a child who cannot read yet can gain understanding through peer-group (i.e., teacher not involved) discussions still lacks the ability to read! "When teachers do not understand the potential of the students they teach, they will underteach them no matter what the methodology" (p. 175).

In teacher education, there is a defeatist attutde where we "rely on name-calling and labelling("disadvantaged", "at-risk", "learning disabled", "the underclass") to explain its failures, and calls upon research study after research study to inform teachers that school achievement is intimately and inevitable linked with socioeconomic status... They are told that children of poverty are developmentally slower than other children" (p. 178). "We teach teachers rationales for failure, not visions of success. Is there any wonder that those who are products of such teacher education water down the curriculum for diverse students instead of challenging them with more of what the school has to offer?"

Example: a prestigious university lab school has an entirely European staff but culturally diverse students. Yet they have a problem retaining black students. One teacher does journal entries where, for 6-8 year olds, he encourages drawing to accompany the words. A black student would do great drawings but rarely write words -- the teacher asked his mom how she would handle it: "In black families, we would just tell him write the words first."

> It is an important lesson to us in terms of equity. C. is now getting equal access to the curriculum because he is using the journal for the reasons we intended it. All we needed was a culturally appropriate way to tell him to do it.
> p. 180-181

Teachers must also become personally enriched beyond "the pbulic lives of white Western men." "They must also learn about the brilliance the students bring with them"in their blood." Until the appreciate the wonders of the cultures represented before them -- and they cannot do that without extensive study most appropriately begun in college-level courses -- they cannot appreciate the potential of those who site before them, nor can they begin to link their students' histories and worlds to the subject matter they present in the classroom" (p. 182).
