Module 3
========

Kozol - Fire in the Ashes
-------------------------

### Chapter 8 - Pineapple Comes of Age (Part One)

Pineapple goes to P.S. 65 (same as Ariella's kids) -- she has seen 7 different teachers in her 3rd and 4th grade years. She lives in the Diego-Beekman buildings. Her parents are from Guatemala and are learning English. She attends St. Ann's after school program. Martha (from St. Ann's) considers applying her to a private school.

> Both of us were strong supporters of the public schools -- not of demoralizing places such as P.S. 65 and the local middle schools but, on a larger level, of the whole idea of public education as something that was elemental to American democracy. Still, when a child, as in Pineapple's case, had been short-changed so badly in her first six years of school, Martha was not willing (nor was I) to let her be denied the opportunities that lay beyond the options the city had prescribed.
> p. 179

She ends up attending the school on condition that she repeats the 5th grade. Beyond her falling behind in literacy, "they also recognized that she had never learned the whole array of study-skills that students who had had the benefit of reputable elementary education had mastered long before" (p. 180). "Note-taking is hard for her, because her spelling is so poor. It also seems that she was given almost no instruction about punctuation in her elementary years" (p. 182). She goes through the middle school moving closer to grade level, but the private school did not have a high school. She ends up going to a new school in Rhode Island. The school is more diverse and less "stratospherically" wealthy. "One of the special virtues of this school was its quick responsiveness to difficulties students might encounter at the start of a new course... When she ran into problems, teachers did not wait until she had received a crushing set of grades but intervened before she had to undergo that blow to her self-confidence" (p. 184). Her older sister stayed in the New York schools but managed to graduate and attend college in Rhode Island. Her parents also move to Rhode Island -- they are able to keep their family ties to New York thanks to the proximity. Her younger sister is accepted to the same school as Pineapple.

### Chapter 9 - Pineapple in All Her Glory (And Still Bossing Me Around)

Pineapple's father's green card renewal had been denied. He loses his job as a result -- her mom lost her job working with the elderly and now works as a housekeeper in a chain motel. The father is forced to return to Guatemala, mom stays behind. "[Lara, the older sister] wanted to go on and obtain a graduate degree in order to be certified as a classroom teacher. "But if it's just impossible," she said, "I would put it off a year, or maybe two years, so that I could work full-time" and earn enough to function as a back-up for the other members of the family" (p. 195). Virgilio (Pineapple's father) manages to illegally come back into the US for Lara's graduation.

> In spite of all the condemnation he'd incurred from his critics in Rhode Island who persisted in believing that he'd left his family of his own volition, with the implication that he was deficient in his love for his own children, he had been prepared to undergo arrest -- or, given the vigilante atmosphere along the Arizona border, even greater dangers -- in order to attend his daughter's graduation.
> p. 197

Virgilio is to return to Guatemala with his wife and Miguel, the younger sister. Therefore, Lana and Pineapple need to find their own apartment. Pineapple spends time reflecting on her violent surroundings in New York:

> Pineapple: "You see, back then, I guess I thought that this was normal because it was all I knew. I had nothing to compare it to. I didn't know when I was ten that it wasn't like this for most other children. I didn't start to think about this kind of things until I was older, when I went to private school. Now I understand it more because I've seen it from both sides and I've read a lot of stuff and I talk about it with my sisters. We understand there needs to be a whole lot of improvement. But for that to happen, other things, bigger things, would have to happen first. The entire attitude of white superiority would have to be attacked. You would have to start again from Scratch."
> p. 202

> Hearing the indignation in her voice, I was reminded of other students I had known -- black and Latino students mostly, but conscientious young white people too -- who became so wrathful or seemed to be so overwhelmed by the sheer dimensions of the problems they perceived that they tended to give up on many good and useful things they could have done right here and now within the social system as it stands. I recalled a piece of practical advice and helpful exhortation I had heard from someone older than  myself some years before: "Look for battles big enough to matter but, at the same time, small enough to sin some realistic victories."
> p. 204

They move into their new apartment thanks in part to their church raising $3000 for them. Each of the sisters gets their own job, Lara putting off grad school to work at a daycare.
