Module 2
========

Lisa Delpit - Other People's Children
-------------------------------------

### The Vilis Tokples Schools of Papua New Guinea

> Unlike the academic world in which I spend most of my time, in my home world, heritage -- not title and position -- is central to identity. To be disconnected from that identity means losing not only the ability to explain one's essence to others but also any potential for self-knowledge as well.
> p. 77

Delpit is in Papua New Guinea on a research project. PNG is extremely diverse, specificly in the number of languages, "over seven hundred different indigenous languages." Only 25-30% speak English. The most widely spoken language (as a second language, usually) is Tok Pisin, a "pidgin" language developed during the Australian slave trade. However, Tok Pisin has been rejected as a language in schools.

> The educational language choice in Papua New Guinea, as in many other Third World countries, has been subjected to two conflicting forces: on the one hand, serving the needs of a developing nation-state with a modern exchange economy, and, on the other, serving the welfare, development, nad cohesion of local, predominantly rural village communities.
> p. 79

Schooling and literacy is introduced mainly by missionaries, "so that converts could read the Bible in their village setting."Additionally, the colonial government wanted a workforce that could communicate with the West. However, in the 1970s, literacy and math standards were dropping. "Instead of Australian and American teachers, local Papua New Guinean teachers were forced to instruct in English, a language they barely spoke and their students understood not at all."

> What researchers began to note was that even where parents actively welcomed a transforming English- and Western-focused role for the school, seeing it as a means to bring direct social and economic benefits to the community, they were unable to anticipate the disruption to social relations between young and old in rural communities that i could entail. Traditional customs, beliefs, values, and practices were devalued, leading to a sense of powerlessness, vis-a-vis the school.
> p. 81

In 1980, a new school caled Vilis Tokples Pri-Skul was created in the Buka and Buin regions of the North Solomons. The program had three goals:

+ Teach children to read, write, count in their native language before transfering to English
+ Teach the customs, culture, values of their community
+ Teach the Western basic preschool skills in preparation for the English-based primary school

This is a "bilingual, bicultural process of education". The region has placed an importance on an understanding of the tok ples (indigenous language). "Most people believed English to be more important as a **written** language than as a **spoken** language for village life." However, there is a distaste of Tok Pisin, ranging from a necessary evil to communicate with the other regions in PNG to "The children learned Pidgin and they forgot our traditions" (p. 86).

> They wanted "what was good from the old" so as to have children feel the security of a strong cultural base, and the "best of the new" so as to allow them to enter the changing world of towns and technology.
> p. 87

Children start tokples school at age 7, have two years of preschooling, the enter English primary school at 9 for six years. Teachers are chosen by local villagers. Parents seem to like the program, noting strong literacy among students.

> The testing I conducted during my research supported the theory that children learn to read only once, and if they learn to read in a language they already understand orally, they become literate much more quickly and effectively than do those who learn in a foreign language.
> p. 88

> Parent: "He is not only reading and writing about things outside, but learning through reading and writing to be proud of our way of life. When he is big, he will not reject us. It is important to teach our children to read and write, but it is more important to teach them to be proud of themselves, and of us.
> p. 89

### "Hello, Grandfather": Lessons from Alaska

Delpit reflects on the idea of connectedness, reinforced by her time in Alaska speaking with native people's understanding of our role in the world: "to be a part of the world rather than dominate it." Part of this is an understanding of placing things in context. "In education, we set about solving educational problems as if they exist in a vacuum. We isolate the problem and then seek technical solutions." She mentions the literacy "problem" in Alaska, and the call for technical solutions (more phonics! less phonics! etc).

> In our Western academic worldview, we assume that literacy is unequivocally god, and that everyone should aspire to be literate. Most of us have not taken the time to think about possible drawbacks or political implications of this ideology. Literacy can be a tool of liberation, but, equally, it can be a means of control.
> p. 93-94

In her experiences in Alaska, Delpit notices that Native Alaskans value connectedness with people over literature, bringing up the connection between literacy and orality. Some research has contrasted the two, noticing success in teaching literacy when decontextualizing the words in a passage. However, Delpit notices that Native Alaskans in their home lives value the context in which text is said. She brings up a comparison between an Anglo teacher, who directs with words (tells children to copy words on the blackboard while standing away from it), versus a Native teacher, who directs with actions (stands by the blackboard while giving instruction).

> It would be easy to suggest that the Anglo teacher should be more consistent, but in truth he may well be unconsciously preparing children for their future schooling, where they will be expected to attend to the words and not the surrounding context. Yet, if they learn what he teaches, they could find themselves in conflict with what they learn at home.
> p. 98-99

> When children who have been brought up to trust their own observations enter school, they confront teachers, who, in their estimation, act as unbelievable tyrants. From the children's perspective, their teachers attempt to coerce behavior... Despite the rhetoric of American education, it does not teach children to be independent, but rather to be dependent on external sources for direction, for truth, for meaning. It trains children both to seek meaning solely from the text and to seek truth outside of their own good sense -- concepts that are foreign and dangerous to Alaskan village communities.
> p. 101-102

Delpit gives examples of how contextualizing a lesson can help Native Alaskan student develop literacy skills. Ex, having children write down how to make Native foods, then watching the teacher struggle following their directions. "After a while, the children learned that they could make use of decontextualized literacy when they needed to. They did notlearn, however, that they had to give up their own contextual way of experiencing the world."

> "The purpose of education is to learn to die satiated with life."
> p. 104

### Teachers' Voices: Rethinking Teacher Education for Diversity

Delpit notes how "minority" students are starting to represent a majority, yet "the current number of teachers from nonwhite groups threatens to fall below 10 percent". She cites both African-American and Native Alaskan teachers suggesting their teacher education focused on teaching white children, and that their views were not appreciated. Delpit interviews 12 teachers total (6 African-American, 6 Native Alaskan) about their experiences in their teacher education.

1. "Most of the black and Native teachers interviewed believe accounts of their own experiences are not validated in teacher education programs or in their subsequent teaching lives" (p. 108).

> First, the university does not value personal narratives as having legitimate cognitive function. Discourse in the university setting is more valued if it reflects independence of context, analysis, and objectification of experience.
> p. 109

2. "The teachers interviewed frequently encountered negative and/or stereotypical cultural and racial attitudes directed toward themselves and toward ethnic minority children" (p. 110)

Delpit categorized such frustration in four ways: bias toward children of color by nonminority teachers, bias against the teacher by parents/children, bias against the teacher by other teachers, and bias against the teacher by their teacher education (curriculum, profs, students).

> Several researchers have observed that there are large numbers of nonwhite teachers who are certified to teach but are not teaching. Consequently, those who seek to increase the numbers of teachers of coloor cannot only recruit new minority students to teacher education programs; they must identify why teachers leave the profession. If these interviews are in any way representative of the larger population, in order to recruit and retain teachers of color, schools of education must find means to address what these teachers perceive as racial discrimination during teacher education and beyond.
> p. 115

With modern prejudices being much more subtle, it will be difficult to overcome bias in education. Furthermore, "some researchers have demonstrated that bias can cause lowered performance for those who are its victims" (p. 116).

3. "The teachers interviewed report significant differences from their white colleagues in classroom pedagogy and discipline, saying that their teaching styles are most influenced by their own experiences as learners, their reflections about their students, and from the culture bearers in their community." (p. 116)

Specifically, there was a frustration that they were forced into teaching a curriculum without reflecting on how the students are learning the material (or what the students want to learn!)

4. "The teachers interviewed often felt isolated from instructors and other students during their teacher training." (p. 122)

The obvious solution is to have more nonwhite participation in teacher education, both as professors and students. In the meantime, "A Native village woman found great support from her white male instructors who provided individual attention and encouragement." We can also look to reduce tokenism in the classroom, "when a single individual is viewed as a representative of a low status group" (p. 124).

Delpit proposes that encouraging students (and student teachers) to bring their past experiences and knowledge will reduce the conflict brought up in the interviews.

> Dewey recommends that students be encouraged to bring their personal experiences to bear upon subject matter presented in the classroom. Doing otherwise, he warns, prevents teachers from developing and using their own independent intelligence and reinforces their "intellectual subserviency." Dewey further advises that failure to allow students to explore their past experiences in light of theoretical constructs will produce only a mindless imitation of others' practice rather than a reflection on teaching as an interactive process.
> p. 125

Jonathan Kozol - Fire In The Ashes
----------------------------------

### Chapter 2: Eric and His Sister

Vicky has been going through a number of shelters. She has clinical depression and periodic seizures. She ends up at the Martinique hotel.

> The psychological and physical exhaustion families underwent when they were moving constantly tended to have a predictable effect. It undermined whatever capability for good clear-headed thinking might still exist within the spirits of the stronger women while, in the case of those like Vicky who were not strong at all, it simply added to their pre-existent instability. Vicky, as she told me later, fell into a "zombie-like" condition -- she felt, she said, "like I was walkin' in my sleep"
> p. 14

The man who owns the Martinique himself lost custody of his child after being conviced of abuse and neglect. Vicky had two children, Lisette and Eric. In ***19993***, she is living in Mott Haven in the South Bronx, near St. Ann's Church that ran an "excellent and innovative afterschool" which Kozol was a part of. At the church is a woman named Martha Overall, who practiced law and assisted with the legal challenges of the residents in the area.

Vicky notices signs of Eric falling into trouble, despite having the church as a place to go. Lisette is doing well in school, but in response to an A+ on a book report:

> "An A-plus on a book report doesn't mean a whole lot at this school she goes to," Vicky said once Lisette was gone. "her teachers like her. They do the best they can. But I don't think they can give her what a girl with her potential ought to have... You see, this is the best that I can get for her right now. I don't accept it -- yet I do, because I don't know any choice I have."
> p. 21

**1996**, Kozol is contacted by William Edwards, a doctor in a small town in Montana who belonged to a church who read Kozol's books and wanted to help if possible. He offered "to find a place in our community" to any family Kozol thought would do better outside of New York. Kozol is initially skeptical of the offer.

> There is an intimidating rhetoric of cultural defensiveness in many inner-city neighborhoods like those of the South Bronx, which sometimes has the power to inhibit any actions that might tend to breka down racial borders and to stigmatize the people who propose them as "invasive" or "paternalistic."
> p. 23

However, he eventually puts Vicky in contact with William. She excitedly accepts the offer. The church provides a home as well as grocery and startup money. Lisette and Vicky initially seem happy with the arrangements. However Eric is struggling, "He's havin' a harder time. Missed too much back in New York. No one here can figure out what they was doin' with him at his school." 

Dr. Edwards spends time with the family, taking the kids out on excursions, and gives them regular checkups. He invites a black school principle from another town to spend time specifically with Eric to try and catch him up. However, Eric does not open up to the special attention. Lisette, meanwhile, has been getting into trouble for things like shoplifting. Dr. Edwards suggests sending her to a program in Yellowstone, "Counseling and leadership, and learning to mark trails. Learning about conservation right there in the wild. They don't indulge them. There's a firmness that is always ready to exert itself is a student pushes things too far." She enjoys and responds well, and succeeds in school.

Eric, despite enjoying basketball, drops out of school. Now 18, he spends less time at home and more time with a number of girlfriends.

> Dr. Edwards: "When I try to talk with him, he turns away his eyes. He tells me that he'd like to join the military. But they won't accept him. They insist on a diploma. My friend, who is a principal in another district" -- this was the black principal that Vicky had described -- "has talked with Eric several times. He tells me that he 'closes down' and gives him almost no replies."
> p. 38

Eric eventually gets a girl (with a very religious father) pregnant, and gets deep in trouble with the law. This information reaches Kozol mainly through Dr. Edwards, Vicky meanwhile is less candid in her calls with him. Eventually in **2000**, after Eric breaks into her house and throws a party, Vicky is evicted from her home. Despite help from the church community, she slides into depression and alcoholism.

In **2001**, Eric commits suicide. Vicky reports calling Eric the morning of, and him saying "Mummy, I don't feel no good. I need your help." He comes his mother with his friends, and shoots himself in a different room than Vicky.

> Again and again, [Dr. Edwards] came back to the question of his own responsibility. "I realized there were going to be problems from the first time Vicky opened up to me. And after she had been here for a while she confided in me more and she told me quite a lot of what the kids had undergone when they were in New York. But I overestimated the potential of a different place and different opportunities to overcome what I had hoped they'd left behind."
> p. 45-46

Lisette successfully graduates high school (despite becoming pregnant towards the end) and attends college. Vicky, however, continues to drink and loses contact with Kozol and Dr. Edwards, "she no longer seeks my company."

Ecology of the Family (PowerPoint)
----------------------------------

The ***nuclear family*** consists of a pair of adults and their (socially recognized) children. The ***extended family*** are relatives of the nuclear family who are emotionally dependent on each other.

There are two families a person is a part of -- family of orientation (where one is born) and the family of procreation (when one marries/has children).

A family can be matriarchal, patriarchal, or egalitarian (both parents regarded as equal).

Familes (as well as "the family") can undergo transformation (divorced families, single-parent, lgbt)

There are macrosystem effects on a family.

+	Socioeconomic status. A family has an ***ascribed status*** (social class determined by gender, race, etc) and ***achieved status*** (social class determined by education, income, etc).
+	Cultural norms. Aka, the values that reflect how we should act in a culture.
+	Religion

There are chronosystem effects on family.

+	Domestic policy
+	Immigration policy
+	Foreign policy
+	Economic changes. Ex, job uncertainty, the cost of living (requiring both parents to work), employee benefits.
+	Technological developments.

Ecology of Parenting (PowerPoint)
---------------------------------

We categorize parenting styles in the following way:

+	Authoritarian (up control, down responsive)
+	Authoritative (up control, up responsive)
+	Permissive (down control, up responsive)
+	Uninvolved (down control, down responsive)

How can a parent best help their child? Understanding developmental appropriateness (knowledge of a child's growth patterns and individuality) and guidance. What doesn't help? Abuse & neglect. There is a correlation between abusers and family history of abuse.

What ways does socialization take place in non-parental child care? In an optimal situation, smaller group size, smaller child/adult ratio, caregivers have training in ECE.
