Module 3
========

Kozol - Fire in the Ashes
-------------------------

### Chapter 3: Pietro and His Children

Pietro Locatello. Wife murdered, three children, mother ("Grandma") comes in to help. Pietro, "too shaken to continue", loses doorman/maintance worker job, leads to entering homeless system, ends up at Martinique Hotel.

**1985**. Three children: Christopher (10), Ellie (5), Miranda (4). Christopher "regarded me distrustfully", panhandled.

> Pietro: "At his age, I simply cannot keep him in a cage within this room. It feels like a prison to him. All his friends are out there in the streets. He wants to be there with them."
> p. 53

A man via charity work buys Christopher presents and invites him for one weekend to Long Island.

> "I noticed that he spoke to [Pietro] in tones of thinly veiled contempt, as if he felt that, by Pietro's inability to give him things that other people could afford to buy him, he had lost the right to exercise authority and no longer held the status of a father in his eyes."
> p. 54

**1990**. Family resettled to the Bronx, "only sightly less impoverished and drug-ridden than the area around St. Ann's. Pietro works at grocery store (gets paid under the table to stay on food stamps/welfare). They keep pet kittens and a pet duck. Welfare worker demands they get rid of the duck, despite only costing "three dollars" for two months food. 

> Pietro: "I guess she's thinking, 'This is something they can do without.' And that's correct. But my children have to do without so much. Having animals to play with is a little thing, I guess. It's a little 'extra.' I guess they figure it's too much. It's hard to know the answer: What's too much? What's enough? Kids need clothing. They need food. They need a roof above their heads. Do they also need to have a pet?"
> p. 58

Christopher (almost 15) has "pretty much dropped out of school". Pietro has "no power to control him" and "Grandma, he said, was the one that Christopher confided in". Kozol suggests Grandma "made up lies in his defense".

He is "several years below the level of an average student" because of his years of homelessness. Why did he not get the public education? Kozol cites "bureaucratic chaos or the failure of the schools to communicate with parents" (p.59).

> "It would have required an inordinate degree of compassionate attention, not only in the schools but in a broad array of public institutions, to have had the slightest chance of turning back this very angry adolescent from the way that he was heading."
> p. 60

**1995**. The girls are at Catholic school paid for by Kozol's foundation. Pietro & Grandma make sure they have clean clothes, were not allowed out late, one girl reports, "People in the neighborhood treated us as if they knew we were protected, that we were a close family." Christopher has been in/out of Rikers, having pushed a stranger onto subway tracks. Kozol (reluctantly, at request of father) sends letters of support to courts, but eventually stops replying to Christopher after not being convinced he has changed.

**1998**. Pietro lost his Section 8 (thanks to "arbitrary and erratic" "bureaucratic workings"), causing Miranda + her sister to be "out there on their own". Miranda drops out of school her senior year to find a job. After lots of part-time work, she finds longer term employement in home care for the elderly. Becomes pregnant at 20, as a result is put on rent assistance and food stamps.

**2005+**. Christopher is out of prision and (since she was the only one who "had a home that he could come to") stays with Miranda. Eventually he gets a job at Equinox (lol), but he doesn't help Miranda with rent or food, spends money on himself.

> "At last I told him he would have to leave." She spoke about this with a sense of sorrow at her inability to keep him there and, as I suspect she may have wistfully believed, to function as a counterforce, by her availability and physical proximity, against his seemingly compulsive inclination to do almost anything that would get him into trouble once again.
> p. 68

Grandma begins showing signs of Alzheimer's and is put in a nursing home. At some point, she signed over the legal right to oversee her finances to Christopher. She had been receiving a widow's pension, which had accumulated to a fair amount unbeknownst to her. Pietro wants to divide the money equally among his children.

> "When I told him I would not permit this, he was very rude to me. I told him, 'I'm your father. You're my son. I want you to obey me.'"  But Christopher, he said, had suddenly grown cold again. "My son has turned away from me".

> "When Daddy said it wasn't right for him to take the money, my brother really slammed him -- 'I'm the one in charge of things.' He could be a monster"
> p. 71

Pietro's health starts to deteriorate due to his physically demanding part-time work. He has a stroke and dies shortly after, Grandma dies a few months later.

> In comparison to Vicky's story (ch. 2): The survival and the stamina of the younger sister and the growing hardness and the loss of stable bearings in the older brother are what I had in mind in saying, as I did, that I did not look for "patterns" but could not escape the sense that there were parallels.

> [Christopher and Eric] received their first induction into cynical behavior, distancing, dishonesty, and patterns of evasiveness in the homeless shelters and in the years that followed when they were resettled in impoverished neighborhoods that had the fewest services of social intervention on the part of public institutions.
> p. 74-75

**2009**. Christopher, despite being connected to a charitable agency for former inmates which helped him get a part-time job and apartment, dies (possibly intentionally) of a heroin overdose. This links the story to Eric, who killed himself by gunshot.

> Miranda: "He got the bad part of the deal when we were young. For me and Ellie, even back when we were in the Martinique, we never felt we had to be so hard and cold because we had our Grandma and our Daddy to take care of us. We would never have to go into the streets. Besides, we thought, 'Our brother does it *for* us.' Like he'd bring us presents now and then -- little things, nothing real expensive, but he didn't need to do it, so that *did* mean something to us. He was our big brother. It was like, 'He'll be looking out for us...'"
> p. 78

### Chapter 4: Silvio: Invincible

Kozol describes NYC's homeless agency carrying out deterrence strategies to discourage the homeless from seeking their services. Ex, Emergency Assistance Units (EAUs) which held homeless waiting for the city to find them shelter. Undivided space with other homeless families. Sometimes held there for weeks (to "test" them to see if they truly need the service).

Ariella Patterson, mother of two boys (6, 9), goes through this and ends up at the Martinique Hotel. Finished high school and had some college credits. After going through a lot of bureaucracy, gets an apartment in the same neighborhood as Vicky (ch. 2). Known as the "Diego-Beekman complex", subsidized by federal funds but privately owned. "The buildings were routinely cited for serious infractions of the law." Including lack of security, which led to active and open drug trade.

> Ariella: "Some kept their spirits up, decorated their apartments nicely, gave their kids a good sense of security, and protected them from getting into risky situations. I think it was much harder for the families that had come out of the shelters. You just can't put that many people who are shaky and unstable, and children who are loaded with a lot of pent-up anger, into a single neighborhood without it having some effect on almost everyone."
> p. 86-87

**1993**. Ariella holds multiple retail sales jobs. Makes $16k, double the average in the Mott Haven neighborhood. Took children to museums, restaurants. "I wanted them to understand that life as they were seeing it around them in the neighborhood did not necessairly have to define them." (p. 90). However, unable to "counteract the tide of violence and drug-related wildness" that he grew up in, son Silvio (12) starts stealing, drug use. Eventually Ariella files for a PINS ("person in need of supervision"), sends him to a group home. Silvio begs to come home, Ariella complies, but he continues getting into danger (ends up with a knife slash across his face). He is killed at 14 years old (1989) "surfing" on the roof of a train with friends.

> All the early efforts she had made, the visits to the museums and concert halls and restaurants and other nice and interesting places in Manhattan -- all those efforts to expose him to the normal things that children in the safer and less troubled sections of New York might ordinarily enjoy -- was there ever any chance at all that this would make the silghtest difference for a boy who'd seen what he'd already seen and whose chosen avatar of the triumphant and exciting life had been a movie character, who came to his own demise, as it happened, in a hail of bullets, by the name of "Scarface"?
> p. 94-95

Ariella describes being surrounded by groups of dealers. The leader of one, "in the eyes of teenage boys... he was a celebrity" and "because the stuff he sold was good, people who were desperate for drugs knew they could depend on him." (p. 97). Ariella tries to keep other son Armando out of it, especially when children were used to carry drugs for dealers. Armando has good attendence, but goes to a poor school and is diagnosed with a learning disibility, yet "the school did not provide him with the specialized instruction required under state and federal legislation for a student who had been identified as having special needs." (p. 98).

> Ariella: "So even though he failied his courses they would pass him pon from grade to grade. He wasn't learning, but they kept promoting him and sent him on to middle school."
> p. 98

Armando drops out before finishing 9th grade and starts dealing. He is arrested for weapon posession and later posession of heroin/cocaine. Does 4 years in prison, ends up becoming addicted to heroin in prison. Ends up going in and out of Riker's Island, gets married and his two children during this time. Has since stayed out of prison, but still "as a former convict and with the limitations of his education, he has found it difficult to obtain the kids of jobs that can support his family" (p. 102).

Ariella has two younger boys as well, who would have been young enough to escape any strong conscious influence from the Martinique Hotel. She agressively makes sure Stephen, the older of the two, is placed in better elementary/middle schools. Stephen was able to get through bouts of depression thanks to a psychiatric center at Mount Sinai Hospital ("believed by people in her neighborhood to be a place that served primarily the white and middle class, which may perhaps have been an accurate impression"). Graduates high school on time and is planning on returning back to college.
